# tapiGen2
PL/SQL Table API Generator for Oracle

tapiGen2 is the continuation of the Open Source proyect created by Daniel McGhan in 2008, [tapiGen](http://sourceforge.net/projects/tapigen/). It aims to automate the creation of PLSQL TABLE APIs.

Let's start by taking a look a single row fetch by id - a very common operation. 

This would typically consume 4 lines of code:
```sql   
SELECT *
INTO l_table_rec
FROM table_name
WHERE id = l_var_with_id;
```

Although its easy enough to write there are a few problems with this approach. 

1. This implicit cursor introduces a possible NO_DATA_FOUND exception that should be handled - that means more code. Explicit cursors would also require more code.
2. Each statement written like this must be maintained. If the table name is changed then all of the statements must be updated.
3. If any statements written for this purpose are not written exactly the same, Oracle may take a little longer to execute the query.
         
The RT function in tapiGen was created for this very purpose and is used as 
follows:
   
    l_table_rec := table_name_te.rt(l_var_with_id);


That's it, one line! Granted there are many more lines behind the scenes, but
you did not have to write them nor must you maintain them. Errors are handled,
maintenance is easier, and if everyone uses this function, performance is
better. In fact, if you're using Oracle 11g, the function cache will be used 
for subsequent calls.


## What's New in tapiGen2

tapiGen2 has been rewritten to complete, but based on the same philosophy as its predecessor. tapiGen2 uses the template engine [tePLSQL](https://github.com/osalvador/tePLSQL) that simplifying the creation of code and allows it to be easily customizable.

It also adds new features to the generated API, and some of them are modified. 
I decided to eliminate the management of exceptions raised by Daniel McGhan because I believe that exception handling is very personal and depends on the architecture chosen for each project 

Also it includes:

  - The restriction that the primary key was a single column is deleted. Now the primary key can be 0 to N columns. if the table has no primary key, parameter `unique_key` must be not null.   
  - The `tt` PIPELINED function is added, which returns an array of records and standardizes access to the table using the API without losing the power to make queries directly.
  - DML operations through the rowid are added, which facilitates their use to API clients. `upd_rowid`, `web_upd_rowid`, `del_rowid` y `web_del_rowid` 
  - Audit columns are received as parameter and are not mandatory.
  - Resitrcción that the table has a sequence is deleted, but if there have to modify the generated code to add `nextval()`, in construction. 
  - SHA1 is used instead of MD5 hash, in Oracle 12c we will use SHA256.
  - The `put_apex_form_code` procedure is removed.

## Getting started

### Install
Download and compile 

- tePLSQL.pks
- TAPI_GEN2.pks
- tePLSQL.pkb
- TAPI_GEN2.pkb

Execute on `DBMS_CRYPTO` grant are necesary. 

### Usage

#### Basic Example
Create Table API for DEPT table, without audit columns

```plsql
exec tapi_gen2.create_tapi_package (p_table_name => 'DEPT', p_compile_table_api => TRUE);
```

Result: 

    Creation of Table API package for DEPT table completed successfully!

#### With audit columns
Create Table API for EMP table assign custom audit columns. 

```plsql
exec tapi_gen2.create_tapi_package (p_table_name => 'EMP'
                                  , p_compile_table_api => FALSE
                                  , p_created_by_col_name => 'usr_create'
                                  , p_created_date_col_name => 'date_create'
                                  , p_modified_by_col_name => 'usr_update'
                                  , p_modified_date_col_name => 'date_update');
```

Because `p_compile_table_api` is set to `FALSE` tapiGen2 show source via `DBMS_OUTPUT`: 

```plsql
CREATE OR REPLACE PACKAGE tapi_DEPT
IS
   /**
   -- # TAPI_DEPT
   -- Generated by: tapiGen2 - DO NOT MODIFY!
   -- Website: github.com/osalvador/tapiGen2
   -- Created On: 15-JUL-2015 17:33
   -- Created By: TEST
   */

   --Scalar/Column types
   SUBTYPE hash_t IS varchar2 (40);

   --Record type
   TYPE DEPT_rt
   IS
      RECORD (
        deptno   DEPT.deptno%TYPE,
    dname   DEPT.dname%TYPE,
    loc   DEPT.loc%TYPE,
        hash               hash_t,
        row_id            VARCHAR2(64)
      );
.....
```

## Functions and procedures that exist within each package that tapiGen2 creates

Here is a brief list of the various functions and procedures that exist within
each package that tapiGen creates: *(f) = function and (p) = procedure

1. ``rt`` (f) - Returns a record from the table. Uses function result cache in
11g.
2. ``rt_for_update`` (f) - Returns a record from the table and places a row level
lock on it.
3. ``tt`` (f) - Returns record Table as PIPELINED Function. 
Pipelining negates the need to build huge collections by piping rows out of the function as they are created, saving memory and allowing subsequent processing to start before all the rows are generated -- <cite>[Oracle Base Blog][1]</cite>
4. ``ins`` (p) - Inserts a row into the table. Automaticaly updates the audit
columns: created_by, created_date, modified_by, and modified_date.
5. ``upd`` (p) - Updates a row in the table. Automaticaly updates the audit
columns: modified_by, and modified_date.
6. ``web_upd`` (p) - Updates a row in the table. Performs an optimistic locking 
check prior to performing the update. Automaticaly updates the audit
columns: modified_by, and modified_date - ApEx compatible.
7. ``del`` (p) - Deletes a row from the table.
8. ``web_del`` (p) - Deletes a row from the table. Performs an optimistic locking check prior to performing the update.
9. ``hash`` (f) - Returns an SHA1 hash of a row in the table.
10. `upd_rowid` (p) - Same as `upd` but access directly to the row by rowid.
11. `web_upd_rowid` (p) - Same as `web_upd` but access directly to the row by rowid.
12. `del_rowid` (p) - Same as `del` but access directly to the row by rowid.
13. `web_del_rowid` (p) - Same as `web_del` but access directly to the row by rowid.
14. `hash_rowid` (f) - Same as `hash` but access directly to the row by rowid.


[1]:https://oracle-base.com/articles/misc/pipelined-table-functions#pipelined_table_functions

## tapiGen2 procedure description
### CREATE_TAPI_PACKAGE

```plsql
PROCEDURE create_tapi_package (p_table_name               IN VARCHAR2
                                , p_compile_table_api        IN BOOLEAN DEFAULT TRUE
                                , p_unique_key               IN VARCHAR2 DEFAULT NULL
                                , p_created_by_col_name      IN VARCHAR2 DEFAULT NULL
                                , p_created_date_col_name    IN VARCHAR2 DEFAULT NULL
                                , p_modified_by_col_name     IN VARCHAR2 DEFAULT NULL
                                , p_modified_date_col_name   IN VARCHAR2 DEFAULT NULL);
```

#### Description:
Create PL/SQL Table API

#### IN Paramters

| Name | Type | Description
|------|------|------------
| p_table_name | VARCHAR2 | must be NOT NULL
| p_compile_table_api | BOOLEAN | TRUE for compile generated package, FALSE to DBMS_OUTPUT the source
| p_unique_key | VARCHAR2 | If the table has no primary key, it indicates the column that will be used as a unique key
| p_created_by_col_name | VARCHAR2 | Custom audit column
| p_created_date_col_name | VARCHAR2 | Custom audit column
| p_modified_by_col_name | VARCHAR2 | Custom audit column
| p_modified_date_col_name | VARCHAR2 | Custom audit column


#### Amendments

| When         | Who                      | What
|--------------|--------------------------|------------------
|16-JUL-2015   | osalvador                | Created


## Contributing

If you have ideas, get in touch directly.

Please inser at the bottom of your commit message the following line using your name and e-mail address .

    Signed-off-by: Your Name <you@example.org>

This can be automatically added to pull requests by committing with:

    git commit --signoff

## License

Copyright 2015 Oscar Salvador Magallanes 

tapiGen2 is under MIT license. 
